## Rob Gillen, T00215814 CSC5760, Chapter 1

### Problem 1.6
__Derive formulas for the number of receives and additions that `core 0` carries out using:__

a. __the original pseudo-code for a global sum, and__

Based on the code sample in the book:

$x = (p-1)$

Where:

- $p$ is the number of cores on the system
- $x$ is the total number of receive operations `core 0` performs (number of addition operations is the same value)

Note: the equations above assume the question was focused only on the operations after the inital calcuations (core-specific tasks) were performed.

b. __the tree-structured global sum__

Based on the approach illustrated in the book:

$x = \left \lceil{Log_2(p)}\right \rceil$

- $p$ is the number of cores on the system
- $x$ is the total number of receive operations `core 0` performs (number of addition operations is the same value)

Note: the equations above assume the question was focused only on the operations after the inital calcuations (core-specific tasks) were performed.

Note: the equation above only works nicely for core counts that are even powers of 2 (e.g. `2, 4, 8, 16, 32...`). For other values (e.g. `12`) the answer should be rounded up to the next whole number (for $p=12$, $x \approx 3.58$; $x = 4$)

\pagebreak

## Rob Gillen, T00215814

__Make a table showing the numbers of receives and additions carred out by core 0 when the two sums are used with `2, 4, 8, ... 1024` cores.__

| Core Count | Approach 1 | Tree-Based |
|-----------:|-----------:|-----------:|
| 2 | 1 | 1 |
| 4 | 3 | 2 |
| 8 | 7 | 3 |
| 16   | 15   | 4 |
| 32   | 31   | 5 |
| 64   | 63   | 6 |
| 128  | 127  | 7 |
| 256  | 255  | 8 |
| 512  | 511  | 9 |
| 1024 | 1023 | 10 |

Note: This table shows the total number of receives which is the same as the total number of addition operations. Multiplying the values in two right-most columns will yield the sum of receives and additions for the given core count.

\pagebreak

## Rob Gillen, T00215814

### Problem 1.7
__The first part of the global sum example - when each core adds its assigned computed values - is usually considered to be an example of data-parallelism, while the second part of the first global sum - when cores send their partial sums to the master core, which adds them - could be considered to be an example of task-parallelism. What about the second part of the second global sum - when the cores use a tree structure to add their partial sums? Is this an example of data- or task- parallelism? Why?__

I would consider this portion to be data-parallelism though I could see the argument for calling it task-parallelism. In my mind, at each subsequent step in the tree structure, you are performing the same "task" (adding two numbers), you simply have fewer nodes participating, and the size of the data set is getting smaller with each iteration.

If you viewed the tasks as unique (e.g. T1: add numbers from C0, C1; T2: add numbers from C2, C3; etc.) I suppose you could argue for task-parallelism.
