---
author:
- Rob Gillen
title: Single Chip Heterogeneity
subtitle: A Brief Survey
titlepage-note: |
  General welcome to the talk, quick background on me and my work/experience.

  10+ years at the lab, research in text, ml, cyber, embedded systems, signal processing

  11 years as a developer/consultant in industry, worked with service providers world-wide.
institute: |
  Oak Ridge National Laboratory |
  Tennessee Technological University
...

## Introduction

- Definitions
- Paper Reviews
    - *Heterogeneous Computing Here To Stay*
    - *Elastic Computing: A Framework for Transparent, Portable, and Adaptive Multi-core Heterogenous Computing*
    - *A Survey on hardware-aware and heterogenous computing on multicore processors and accelerators*
    - *Single-Chip Heterogenous Computing: Does the Future Include Custom Logic, FPGAs, and GPGPUs?*
- Conclusion

\note{
    Spend some time on the definition of heterogeneous computing

    The combination of a CPU and, really, any other processor or processors.

    GPU, FPGA, DSP, ASICs, Neuromorphic, etc.

    It is increasingly common to see these various processors within a given system.

    Seeing them on the same chip/piece of silicon is less common (Xilinx, Altera)

}

## Heterogeneous Computing Here To Stay
- Published in 2016, Zahran: New York University
- Broad overview of Heterogeneous Computing
- Common/Recurring Topics:
    - Productivity of Programmer vs. Performance of Generated Software
    - Power, speed, which is best?
    - Interprocessor interconnections
    - Ability of developers to exploit the heterogenity is elusive.
- DARPA Page 3 project

\note{
Mohamed Zahran, a computer science professor at New York University.
basically a position paper

Begins with a broad discussion of different types of processing cores (CPU, GPU, FPGA, Automata Processor, Neruomorphic, ASIC, DSP)

funnels down to a discussion on CPU, GPU, FPGA, \& AP

tension b/t performance and energy consumption

Memory Hiearchary is an issue

Interprocessor interconnects (speed/efficiency)

effective load distribution

general topics:
    - Perf
    - Scalability
    - reliability
    - portability
    - programming challenges
}

## Elastic Computing: A Framework for Transparent, Portable, and Adaptive Multi-core Heterogenous Computing
- Published in 2010, Wernsing, Stitt, University of Florida
- Elastic Functions
    - Logical/algorithmic building blocks
    - Same functionality implemented many times
    - Supports ``context'' or metadata
- Implementation Planning Tool
    - Performance profile of the host machine
    - Run at installation and each peformance-signifcant event
- Elastic Computing runtime
    - Determines based on envrionment, profile, and context, which implementation to use
    - Dynamically substitutes appropriate version

\note{
John Wernsing, Greg Stitt, Electrical \& Computer Engineering, University of Florida Gainesville

Name choice is unfortunate... overlaps with current cloud usage.

Walk-through/explain how each step works

stress  the importance of the metadata (power, input data size, etc.)

Similar approach as desired for DARPA Page 3
}

## A Survey on hardware-aware and heterogenous computing on multicore processors and accelerators
- Published in 2011, Buchty, Heuveline, Karl, Weiss, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
- Good survey of the computing landscape
- Builds strong case for heterogeneous computing in hpc-style numerical simulation
- Current development environments are lacking
- Redundant/Wasteful computing may not be bad
- Believe developers must have intimate knowledge of the hardware to be successful


\note{
Rainer Buchty, Vincent Heuveline, Wolfgang Karl, Jan-Philipp Weiss, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

Review some of the key points of their arguments (power, scale, etc.)

Discuss the programming tools that fail to meet the needs

Discuss the "solution" to the memory wall... the redundant/wasteful computing is not a bad approach.

Discuss opinions regarding the "wrong-ness" of over-focusing on the hardware
}


## Single-Chip Heterogenous Computing: Does the Future Include Custom Logic, FPGAs, and GPGPUs?
- Published in 2010. Chung, Milder, Hoe, Mai: Carnegie Mellon
- Mathematical model/justification for single-chip heterogeneity
- Single-chip heterogeneity is hypotheical
- ``Unconventional Cores'' (U-Cores)
- Justification
    - Strong case for single-chip heterogeneity
    - Off-Chip bandwidth presents a first-order problem
    - Sufficient parallelism must exist to benefit from u-cores


\note{
Eric Chung, Peter Milder, James Hoe, Ken Mai, Carnegie Mellon

Explain the u-cores concept

Mathematical model/justification... discuss need to approximate some numbers in the model

Discuss results (ASIC vs. FPGA vs. GPU vs. CPU)
ASIC 100x1000 better than CPU
FPGA 10x100 worse than ASIC (but more flexible/cheaper) - still way better than CPU
}

## Conclusion

- Older three papers are in strong agreement
    - Survey
    - Support for single-chip
    - Programming Model/Runtime
- 2016 paper shows little has changed
    - New processors
    - *Improved* tools
    - Still a *long* way to go

\note{
Slide notes basically say it all

Discuss similarities

Discuss how much work remains

Hint again at the DARPA project?

Wrap up and thanks!
}

## References

\tiny Eric S. Chung, Peter A. Milder, James C. Hoe, and Ken Mai. 2010. *Single-Chip Heterogeneous Computing: Does the Future Include Custom Logic, FPGAs, and GPGPUs?*. In Proceedings of the 2010 43rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO '43). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 225-236. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MICRO.2010.36


\tiny Rainer Buchty, Vincent Heuveline, Wolfgang Karl, and Jan-Philipp Weiss. 2012. *A survey on hardware-aware and heterogeneous computing on multicore processors and accelerators*. Concurr. Comput. : Pract. Exper. 24, 7 (May 2012), 663-675. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cpe.1904


\tiny John Robert Wernsing and Greg Stitt. 2010. *Elastic computing: a framework for transparent, portable, and adaptive multi-core heterogeneous computing*. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN/SIGBED 2010 conference on Languages, compilers, and tools for embedded systems (LCTES '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 115-124. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1755888.1755906


\tiny Mohamed Zahran. 2017. *Heterogeneous computing: here to stay*. Commun. ACM 60, 3 (February 2017), 42-45. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3024918

\note{
    These papers can be made availble upon request.
}
