---
title: CSC5760 Chapter 4 Homework
author: Rob Gillen
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{fancyhdr}
    - \pagestyle{fancy}
    - \fancyhead[RO,RE]{Chapter 4 Homework}
    - \fancyhead[LO,LE]{Rob Gillen, T00215814}
    - \usepackage{tikz}
    - \usetikzlibrary{calc,shapes.multipart,chains,arrows}
---

## Problem 4.1
The original formulas for each thread's first and last index are as follows:

$${first} = q\left(\frac{m}{t}\right)$$
$${last} = (q+1)\left(\frac{m}{t}\right)-1$$

Where $q$ is the 0-based thread number, $m$ is the number of rows in the matrix, and $t$ is the number of available threads.

One way to account for a matrix row count that is not equally divisible by the thread count would be to take the ceiling of the division operation and then ensure that your greatest `last` index is always less than $m - 1$. The resulting equations might look like the following:

$$b = \left \lceil \frac{m}{t} \right \rceil$$
$${first} = qb$$
$${last} = b(q+1) - 1$$

such that ${last} < (m-1)$. As in the listings above, $q$ is the 0-based thread number, $m$ is the number of rows in the matrix, $t$ is the number of available threads and now $b$ is the per-thread batch size. The code for this could be implemented as such:


```c
void* Pth_mat_vect(void* rank) {
    long my_rank = (long)rank;
    int i, j;

    // add ceiling call to round up
    int local_m = ceil(m/thread_count);
    int my_first_row = my_rank * local_m;
    int my_last_row = (my_rank + 1) * local_m - 1;

    // ensure we don't exceed the # of rows in the matrix
    if (my_last_row >= m) {
        my_last_row = m - 1;
    }

    // we could have extended the guard here instead
    // ((i <= my_last_row) && (i < m));
    for (i = my_first_row; i <= my_last_row; i++) {
        y[i] = 0.0;
        for (j = 0; j < n; j++) {
            y[i] += A[i][j] * x[j];
        }
    }

    return NULL;
}

```

\pagebreak

## Problem 4.3

Interestingly, for values of `n` of $10^3$, $10^4$, $10^5$, $10^6$, $10^7$, $10^8$, the multi-threaded version was consistent with the single-threaded version up to 13 or 14 significant digits. In each case, however, the single-threaded version completed significantly faster than the multi-threaded version (using 4 threads on a laptop with 4 cores). 

When I enabled the compiler optimizations (`-O2`) I found that the code quickly entered what appears to be an endless loop and, even with small values for $n$, it failed to complete, even after running for multiple minutes (the non-optimized version only took a few seconds). 

The variables that need to be marked as `volatile` in order to enable optimizations are `sum` and `flag`. I made these changes and was able to successfully compute $\pi$ after compiling with optimizations enabled (`-O2`). Incidently, for some runs, the code ran *slower* with optimizations enabled than it did without. Either way, the changes were minimal.



\pagebreak

## Problem 4.8

a. The system enters deadock. Thread 0 cannot proceed becuase it is waiting to obtain a lock on mut1 (which it cannot due to the fact that Thread 1 currently has a lock on mut1). The same is true for Thread 1 for the inverse reason.

b. Busy-waiting with two flag variables would not fix the problem - in this case, the flag variables would never be changed to a state to allow the other to obtain access - thereby behaving very much like mutexes.

c. This can still occur even if semaphores are used. The core problem is that nothing has changed b/t time unit 0 and time unit 1. 

In order for this to work (semaphores, busy-waiting or mutexes), someaction has to occur b/t time units 0 and 1 wherein one of the threads either releases a lock, changes a flag variable, or releases the semaphore.






\pagebreak

## Problem 4.11

Given the example linked list below: 

\begin{tikzpicture}[list/.style={rectangle split, rectangle split parts=2,
    draw, rectangle split horizontal}, >=stealth, start chain]
  \node[list,on chain] (A) {A};
  \node[list,on chain] (B) {B};
  \node[list,on chain] (C) {C};
  \node[list,on chain] (D) {D};
  \draw[*->] let \p1 = (A.two), \p2 = (A.center) in (\x1,\y2) -- (B);
  \draw[*->] let \p1 = (B.two), \p2 = (B.center) in (\x1,\y2) -- (C);
  \draw[*->] let \p1 = (C.two), \p2 = (C.center) in (\x1,\y2) -- (D);
\end{tikzpicture}

a. Two deletes executed simultaneously:

__If Thread 0 were to delete Node B and Thread 1 were to delete Node C, the "attachment" (or lack thereof) of Node D would be undefined.__

b. An insert and a delete executed simultaneously

__Thread 0 deletes Node B and Thread 1 inserts Node E between B & C == undefined results__

c. A member and a delete executed simultaneously

__Thread 0 checks for the existance of Node A while Thread 1 deletes it. T0 then proceeds to access node A and a failure occurs__

d. Two inserts executed simultaneously

__T0 inserts Node E between B and C at the same time that T1 inserts Node F between B and C. The success/failure of the operation is likely undefined and there is certainly no deterministic means to know which node actually follows B (E or F).__

e. An insert and a member executed simultaneously

__T0 inserts Node E between B and C at the same time T1 checks to see if Node E is a member of the list. It is possible that T1 would receive a `false` and subsequently attempt to add Node E which would result in an error condition__
